CHAPTER XXVI. KING RICHARD'S RETURN TO ENGLAND.


Journeying onward, Blondel and his companion stopped at many castles, and
were everywhere hospitably entertained. Arriving at Vienna they lingered
for some time, hoping there to be able to obtain some information of the
whereabouts of King Richard. Blondel in his songs artfully introduced
allusions to the captive monarch and to the mourning of all Christendom
at the imprisonment of its champion. These allusions were always well
received, and he found that the great bulk of the nobles of the empire
were indignant and ashamed at the conduct of the emperor in imprisoning
his illustrious rival. The secret of his prison place, however, appeared
to have been so well kept that no information whatever was obtainable.

"We must carry out our original plan," he said at length, "and journey
into the Tyrol. In one of the fortresses there he is most likely to be
confined."

Leaving the capital they wandered up into the mountains for weeks,
visiting one castle after another. It was no easy matter in all cases to
get so near to these prisons as to give a hope that their voice might be
heard within, or an answer received without. More than once cross-bow
bolts were shot at them from the walls when they did not obey the
sentinel's challenge and move further away. Generally, however, it was in
the day time that they sang. Wandering carelessly up, they would sit down
within earshot of the castle, open their wallets, and take out
provisions from their store, and then, having eaten and drunk, Blondel
would produce his lute and sing, as if for his own pleasure. It needed,
however, four visits to each castle before they could be sure that the
captive was not there; for the song had to be sung on each side.
Sometimes they would cheat themselves with the thought that they heard an
answering voice; but it was not until the end of the fourth week, when
singing outside the castle of Diernstein, that a full rich voice, when
Blondel ceased, sang out the second stanza of the poem. With difficulty
Blondel and Cuthbert restrained themselves from an extravagant exhibition
of joy. They knew, however, that men on the prison wall were watching
them as they sat singing, and Blondel, with a final strain taken from a
ballad of a knight who, having discovered the hiding place of his
ladylove, prepared to free her from her oppressors, shouldered his lute,
and they started on their homeward journey.

There was no delay now. At times they sang indeed at castles; but only
when their store was exhausted, for upon these occasions Blondel would
be presented with a handsome goblet or other solid token of the owner's
approval, and the sale of this at the next city would take them far on
their way. They thought it better not to pass through France, as
Philip, they knew, was on the watch to prevent any news of King Richard
reaching England. They therefore again passed through Brabant, and so
by ship to England.

Hearing that Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, one of Richard's vicegerents, was
over in Normandy, and rightly deeming him the most earnest of his
adherents, they at once recrossed the sea, and found the warlike prelate
at Rouen. Greatly delighted was he at hearing that Richard's hiding-place
had been discovered. He at once sent across the news to England, and
ordered it to be published far and wide, and himself announced it to the
barons of Normandy. Then with a gorgeous retinue, including Cuthbert and
Blondel, he started for Vienna, and arriving there demanded an interview
with the emperor.

The news that it was now certain that Richard was imprisoned in a castle
of the emperor, had already spread through Europe, and the bishop had
been received everywhere with tokens of sympathy; and so great was the
feeling shown by the counts and barons of the empire, that the Emperor
Henry felt that he could no longer refuse to treat for the surrender of
his captive. Therefore he granted the interview which Longchamp
demanded. The English envoy was received by the emperor surrounded by his
nobles. The prelate advanced with great dignity.

"I come," he said, "in the name of the people of England to demand the
restoration of King Richard, most unjustly and unknightly detained a
prisoner in his passage through your dominions."

"King Richard was my foe," the emperor said, "open and secret, and I was
justified in detaining one who is alike my enemy and a scourge to Europe
as a prisoner, when fortune threw him in my hands. I am, however, willing
to put him to a ransom, and will upon the payment of 150,000 marks allow
him to go free."

"I deny your right to detain him or to put him to ransom," the bishop
said. "But as you have the power, so my denial is useless. England is
poor, impoverished with war and by the efforts which she made in the
service of our holy religion. Nevertheless, poor as she is, she will
raise the sum you demand. There is not an Englishman who will not furnish
all he can afford for the rescue of our king. But once again, in the
presence of your nobles, I denounce your conduct as base and unkingly."

The emperor could with difficulty restrain his passion; but the sight of
the sombre visages of his nobles showed that they shared in no slight
degree the feelings which the English envoy had so boldly announced.

"Before, however," the emperor said, "I surrender King Richard, he
must be tried by my peers of many and various crimes of which he is
accused. Should he be found guilty of these, no gold can purchase his
release. Should he, however, be acquitted, then as my word is given so
shall it be."

"Although," the prelate said, "I deny your right to try our king, and
believe that he himself will refuse to accept your jurisdiction, yet I
fear not the result if our lord be left in the hands of the nobles of
the empire and not in yours. I can trust their honour and courtesy."

And turning upon his heel, without another word he quitted the apartment.

An hour later the bishop and his following took horse and rode with all
speed to the north coast, and thence sailed for England. The news of the
amount of ransom filled the people with consternation; but preparations
were at once made for collecting the sum demanded. Queen Eleanor was
unceasing in her efforts to raise the money for the release of her
favourite son. The nobles contributed their jewels and silver; the people
gave contributions of goods, for money was so scarce in England that few
had the wherewithal to pay in coin. Prince John placed every obstacle in
the way of the collection; but the barons had since their successful
stand obtained the upper hand, and it was by intrigue only that he could
hinder the collection.

In the meantime, popular opinion throughout Europe was strong upon the
side of King Richard. The pope himself wrote to the emperor on his
behalf. The barons of the empire were indignant at the shame placed upon
their country; and the emperor, although he would fain have thrown
further delays in the way, was obliged at last to order the first step
to be taken.

A solemn diet was ordered to assemble at Worms. Here were collected all
the nobles of the empire, and before them King Richard was brought. It
was a grand assembly. Upon a raised throne on the dais sat the emperor
himself, and beside him and near him were the great feudatories of the
empire, and along the sides of the walls were ranged in long rows the
lesser barons. When the doors were opened and King Richard entered, the
whole assembly, save the emperor, rose in respect to the captive monarch.
Although pale from his long confinement, the proud air of Richard was in
no way abated, and the eyes that had flashed so fearlessly upon the
Saracens looked as sternly down the long lines of the barons of Germany.
Of splendid stature and physique, King Richard was unquestionably the
finest man of his time. He was handsome, with a frank face, but with a
fierce and passionate eye. He wore his moustache with a short beard and
closely-cut whisker. His short curly hair was cropped closely to his
head, upon which he wore a velvet cap with gold coronet, while a scarlet
robe lined with fur fell over his coat of mail, for the emperor had
deemed it imprudent to excite the feeling of the assembly in favour of
the prisoner by depriving him of the symbols of his rank.

King Richard strode to the place prepared for him, and then turning to
the assembly he said, in a voice which rang through the hall,--

"Counts and lords of the Empire of Germany, I, Richard, King of England,
do deny your right to try me. I am a king, and can only be tried by my
peers and by the pope, who is the head of Christendom. I might refuse to
plead, refuse to take any part in this assembly, and appeal to the pope,
who alone has power to punish kings. But I will waive my rights. I rely
upon the honour and probity of the barons of Germany. I have done no man
wrong, and would appear as fearlessly before an assembly of peasants as
before a gathering of barons. Such faults as I may have, and none are
without them, are not such as those with which I am charged. I have slain
many men in anger, but none by treachery. When Richard of England
strikes, he strikes in the light of day. He leaves poison and treachery
to his enemies, and I hurl back with indignation and scorn in the teeth
of him who makes them the charges brought against me."

So saying King Richard took his seat amidst a murmur of applause from the
crowded hall.

The trial then commenced. The accusations against Richard were of many
kinds. Chief among them was the murder of Conrad of Montferat; but there
were charges of having brought the crusade to naught by thwarting the
general plans, by his arrogance in refusing to be bound by the decision
of the other leaders, and by having made a peace contrary to the
interests of the crusaders. The list was a long one; but the evidence
adduced was pitiably weak. Beyond the breath of suspicion, no word of
real evidence connecting him with the murder of Conrad of Montferat was
adduced, and the other charges were supported by no better evidence. Many
of the German barons who had been at the crusades themselves came
forward to testify to the falsity of these charges, and the fact that
Richard had himself placed Conrad of Montferat upon the throne, and had
no possible interest in his death, was alone more than sufficient to
nullify the vague rumours brought against him. Richard himself in a few
scornful words disposed of this accusation. The accusation that he,
Richard of England, would stoop to poison a man whom he could have
crushed in an instant, was too absurd to be seriously treated.

"I am sure," the king said, "that not one person here believes this idle
tale. That I did not always agree with the other leaders is true; but I
call upon every one here to say whether, had they listened to me and
followed my advice, the crusade would not have had another ending. Even
after Phillip of France had withdrawn; even after I had been deserted by
John of Austria, I led the troops of the crusaders from every danger and
every difficulty to within sight of the walls of Jerusalem. Had I been
supported with zeal, the holy city would have been ours; but the apathy,
the folly, and the weakness of the leaders brought ruin upon the army.
They thought not of conquering Jerusalem, but of thwarting me; and I
retort upon them the charge of having sacrificed the success of the
crusade. As to the terms of peace, how were they made? I, with some fifty
knights and 1000 followers alone remained in the Holy Land. Who else, I
ask, so circumstanced, could have obtained any terms whatever from
Saladin? It was the weight of my arm alone which saved Jaffa and Acre,
and the line of seacoast, to the Cross. And had I followed the example
set me by him of Austria and the Frenchman, not one foot of the Holy Land
would now remain in Christian hands."

The trial was soon over, and without a single dissentient the King of
England was acquitted of all the charges brought against him. But the
money was not yet raised, and King Richard was taken back into the heart
of Germany. At length, by prodigious exertions, half the amount claimed
was collected, and upon the solicitations of the pope and of the counts
of his own empire, the emperor consented to release Richard upon, receipt
of this sum and his royal promise that the remainder should be made up.

Not as yet, however, were the intrigues at an end. Prince John and King
Phillip alike implored the emperor to retain his captive, and offered to
him a larger sum than the ransom if he would still hold him in his hands.
Popular opinion was, however, too strong. When the news of these
negotiations became bruited abroad, the counts of the empire, filled with
indignation, protested against this shame and dishonour being brought
upon the country. The pope threatened him with excommunication; and at
last the emperor, feeling that he would risk his throne did he further
insist, was forced to open the prison gates and let the king free.
Cuthbert, Blondel, and a few other trusty friends were at hand, and their
joy at receiving their long-lost sovereign was indeed intense. Horses had
been provided in readiness, and without a moment's delay the king
started, for even at the last moment it was feared that the emperor might
change his mind. This indeed was the case. The king had not started many
hours, when the arrival of fresh messengers from Phillip and John induced
the emperor once more to change his intentions, and a body of men were
sent in pursuit of the king. The latter fortunately made no stay on the
way, but changing horses frequently--for everywhere he was received with
honour and attention--he pushed forward for the coast of the North Sea,
and arrived there two or three hours only before his oppressors.
Fortunately it was night, and taking a boat he embarked without a
moment's delay; and when the emissaries of the emperor arrived the boat
was already out of sight, and in the darkness pursuit was hopeless.

On landing at Dover, the first to present himself before him was Prince
John, who, in the most abject terms besought pardon for the injuries he
had inflicted. King Richard waved him contemptuously aside.

"Go," he said, "and may I forget your injuries as speedily as you will
forget my pardon."

Then taking horse, he rode on to London, where he was received with the
most lively acclamation by his subjects.

The first step of King Richard was to dispossess all the minions of John
from the castles and lands which had been taken from his faithful
adherents. Some of these resisted; but their fortresses were speedily
stormed. Sir Rudolph was not one of these. Immediately the news of King
Richard's arrival in England reached him, feeling that all was now lost,
he rode to the seacoast, took ship, and passed into France, and Cuthbert,
on his arrival at Evesham, found himself undisputed lord of the place. He
found that the hiding-place of his mother had not been discovered, and,
after a short delay to put matters in train, he, attended by a gallant
retinue, rode into Wiltshire to the castle of Sir Baldwin of Bthune.
Here he found the Lady Margaret safe and sound, and mightily pleased to
see him. She was now seventeen, and offered no objections whatever to the
commands of King Richard that she should at once bestow her hand upon the
Earl of Evesham. By the king's order, the wedding took place at London,
the king himself bestowing the bride upon his faithful follower, whom we
may now leave to the enjoyment of the fortune and wife he had so
valiantly won.


THE END.

